SALES FORCASTING IN A SUPER MARKET.docx
OVERVIEW OF SALES FORECASTING
 PROCESS Ideally the sales forecasting process needs different kinds of information from different departments. This could be done by integrating different departments by means of common information system. The business functions of departments like production, sales, purchasing, planning, finance and logistics, supply chain department are different ones, the strategies used by them also differ. While integrating the functions, all the departments share their information on a central information system which is joined with central database warehouse. As all functions work towards the same target, sharing information facilitates productive work. Coordination can be achieved by a central information system. Furthermore sales forecasting also runs on information like marketing, sales, production planning and logistics. All departments need the sales forecasting to plan their activities effectively. Integration of coordination may be the best way to achieve integrated and interactive forecast. The managers at the different functional areas will make the decisions using the data available in the central repository
IMPACT OF SCM ON SALES FORECASTING
 Supply chain is driven by customer needs. In order to ship products to customers who demand them in a dynamic and rapidly changing set of channels, strategic planning of the inventories becomes essential. The model products are available when the customer wants them. Smooth supply chain management is the result of well combined individual managerial functions like planning, organizing and controlling. They are important factors for effective supply chain management1. An exact estimation and reliable predictions of product volume and related services are therefore important for efficient functioning; and such estimations are nothing but forecasts. Demand / Sales forecasting is a crucial factor to any firm. It is a basic factor for the whole planning process and for the control of various sectors of a company such as production, supply, purchasing, marketing and finance. Decisions made in these sectors influence each other either directly or indirectly. Variability in product demand influences several factors which are coming under these sectors such as inventory needed for production (Production department), capital needs (Finance department) or special kind of strategies like outsourcing (Supply department). Forecasting is necessary for a variety of decisions, strategic decisions involving such things as constructing a new plant, developing more supplier capacity, expanding internationally, and other long-run company wide considerations. Forecasts for this type of decisions are highly aggregated estimates of general business trends over the long term.
The general principle indicated here is that the nature ofthe forecast must be matched with the nature ofthe decision. The level of aggregation, the amount of management review, the cost, and the time frame of the forecast needed really depends on the nature ofthe decisions being made3. Moreover, the source ofthe forecast can vary by need as well, as indicated by the useful techniques in the above table 3.2. The frequency and the number of forecasts made in the need for most short term operating decisions don’t warrant extensive management involvement, so computergenerated forecasts are utilized. Strategic decisions, on the other hand, are less frequent and involve more risk, thus justifying the use of more expensive procedures and management involvement .
REASONS FOR UNDERTAKING SALES FORECASTS BY A SUPERMARKET
Businesses are forced to look well ahead in order to plan their investments, launch new products, decide when to close or withdraw products and so on. The sales forecasting process is a critical one for most businesses and the critical areas where sales forecasting is necessary in a company are discussed in the following section.
Sales forecasting need in Planning in a supermarket or a company , business organization
 Manufacturing industries work on principle to satisfy customer demand by appropriate supply. According to Mentzer and Moon (2005), companies consider the sales forecasting as integral part of this process. End customers create demand and it can be increased by activities like. Hence marketing focuses on end customers for creating demand. To meet this created demand supply should be sufficient and smooth. Different management functions like manufacturing, purchasing and logistics work together to maintain the supply. Different suppliers also play an important role in this chain. A constant flow of information runs through the complex structure of different management functions and the parties involved in this. According to Mentzer and Moon, (2005) this flow starts with demand and ends with supply functions. This flow of information is managed by sales and operational process (S&OP). Sales forecasting serves as the initial seeding to the S&OP process. The forecasting may originate from a study of past demand history. As the marketing function originates and manages the demand toward final customer, the necessity of sales forecasting arises from the demand side. Based on the sales forecasting, supply side prepares the capacity plan. The capacity plan is nothing but the capabilities to satisfy demand using maximum possible inputs via information net both forecasting and capacity plans studied out to consider strategies. Mentzer and Moon, (2005) describe two major plans in this process, operation plan and demand plan respectively. Considering different information collected from time to time and strategies undertaken, the demand plans are given out from S & OP system. The demand plans make marketing and supply departments understand future product launching and action needed to achieve corporate strategies. Based on the information available; the operation plan is given out from S&OP to supply functions. This plan consists of different functional plans. Smooth running of S&OP needs accurate forecasting. Continuing with Mentzer’s S&OP model, Armstrong (1983), shows how forecasting process is correlated to formal planning. Planning is a set of activities in company. Planning decides goals and action is taken accordingly. Wood, Robley (1980), Yen and Andrew (1980), Armstrong 97 (1983) describe four steps in planning: 1) specify objectives; 2) generate strategies; 3) evaluate strategies and take actions accordingly; 4) monitor results. Commitment towards the basic goai is a key towards success. But still the accurate forecast plays a major role in successful planning and achieving ofthe final goal. One needs to understand the difference between planning and forecasting. According to Armstrong (1983), forecasting is the process to give estimates and planning is the process to prepare strategies based on these estimates
Sales forecasting need in financial planning in a super market or a business organization.
FACTORS FOR SELECTING THE FORECASTING MODEL BY A SUPER MARKET OR A BUSINESS ORGANIZATION Forecasting and planning are essential to good decision making, as a result financial manger has to use history oriented financial statement with a suitable model. One ofthe model that is followed is Francis-Rowell(FR) model. The objective of this model is to generate pro forma financial statements that describes the future financial condition ofthe firm for any assumed pattern ofsales. The FR model is composed often sectors they are 1) Industry sales 2) Production sector 3) Fixed capital stock requirements 4) Pricing 5) Production costs 6) Income 7) New financing required 8) Risks 9) Costs offinancing and 10) Commong stock valuation5.Forecasting and planning are essential to good decision making, as a result financial manger has to use history oriented financial statement with a suitable model. One ofthe model that is followed is Francis-Rowell(FR) model. The objective of this model is to generate pro forma financial statements that describes the future financial condition ofthe firm for any assumed pattern ofsales. The FR model is composed often sectors they are 1) Industry sales 2) Production sector 3) Fixed capital stock requirements 4) Pricing 5) Production costs 6) Income 7) New financing required 8) Risks 9) Costs offinancing and 10) Commong stock valuation.

There are two major types of forecasting, which can be broadly described as macro and micro: Macro forecasting is concerned with forecasting markets in total. This is about determining the existing level of market demand and considering what will happen to market demand in the future. Micro forecasting is concerned with detailed unit sales forecasts. This is about determining a product’s market share in a particular industry and considering what will happen to that market share in the future. The selection ofwhich type offorecasting and the forecasting accuracy depend on several factors:
Time Horizon 
Most researchers agree that the longer the time horizon, the less accurate the forecast. However, most ofthe researchers disagree on which method to choose for a given time horizon. However Armstrong contends that simple econometric models are superior for long range forecasts. Chambers, Mullick and Smith7 argue that simple growth curves are also an accurate means of generating long term forecasts, whereas short term forecasts are provided by time series methods.
Data availability 
Some researchers say that more accurate forecasts are possible when a greater amount of data is available8. However Markridakis and Hibson found no support for this contention in the series they studied. Possibly longer data series are more likely to involve changes in the underlying forces affecting the series that “confuse” a forecasting method and result in a loss of accuracy.
Type of product 
Most of the authors agree that one of the key factors affecting forecast accuracy is the historical stability of a series. Forecasts ofunstable series are inaccurate. Stability can be measured in many ways, most simple isjudgemental assessment derived from an inspection of a scatter diagram of historical sales. More formal methods of assessing stability are also available, including autocorrelation and “runs” analysis.
FORECASTING METHODS AND TECHNIQUES






















 The ability to model and perform decision modelling and analysis is an essential feature of many real-world applications ranging from emergency medical treatment in intensive care units to military command and control systems. Existing formalisms and methods of inference have not been effective in real-time applications where tradeoffs between decision quality and computational tractability are essential. In practice, an effective approach to time-critical dynamic decision modelling should provide explicit support for the modelling of temporal processes and for t -I dealing with decisions . Almost all managerial decisions are based on forecasts. Every decision becomes operational at some point in the future. So it should be based on forecasts of future conditions. Forecasts are needed throughout an organization — and they should certainly not be produced by an isolated group of forecasters. Neither is forecasting ever "finished". Forecasts are needed continually, and as time moves on, the impact of the forecasts on actual performance is measured; original forecasts are updated; and decisions are modified, and so on. For example, many inventory systems cater to uncertain demand. The inventory parameters in these systems require estimates of the demand and forecast error distributions. The two stages of these systems, forecasting and inventory control, are often examined independently. Most studies tend to look at demand forecasting as if this were an end in itself, or at stock control models as if there were no preceding stages of computation. Nevertheless, it is important to understand the interaction between demand forecasting and inventory control since this influences the performance of the inventory 
system.
FEW TERMS IN SALES FORECASTING 
 Sales demand for an item or package is the projected total trades capacity in a business for a precise interval time in a well-defined location, under a clear advertising system or consumption. It is a term related with different stages of industry publicizing costs.
Sales Prediction:
 Sales Prediction is the anticipated market request a particular level of industry promoting expenses.
Sales Probable: 
Sales Probable is the determined market request, ensuing from a very superior level of business publicizing spending, where additionally increments in spending can have little impact on demand.
Sales Potential: 
Sales potential is the expected business trades of a item or package, based on cut of market latent estimated by the firm.
Sales Prediction: 
Sales Prediction is assessed business sales of a service or merchandise, based on a preferred publicizing costs plan, for an exact time interval, in an anticipated marketing atmosphere.

Time Series: 
Moving Normal Model The Moving Normal model uses the last t time frames with a specific end goal to anticipate request in period t+1. There are two kinds of moving normal models: straightforward moving normal and weighted moving normal. The moving normal model presumption is that the most precise expectation of forthcoming request is a straightforward (direct) blend of previous request. In the simple moving normal models, the projection value is .

